Nodes
=====

SuperCollider's :term:`scsynth` server processes audio by traversaing a
:term:`tree` of :term:`nodes <node>`. Nodes in the tree can be either
:term:`groups <group>` - which *group* together other nodes - or :term:`synths
<synth>` - which perform some kind of audio processing.

During every :term:`sample block <block, of samples>` the server visits each
node in its tree in :term:`depth-first` order, starting from the :term:`root
node`, and performs their audio logic. This traversal order makes the
*position* of those nodes relative to one another significant (*was the reverb
performed before or after the sample was played?*).  Nodes can be added or
removed from the server at any point while it runs allowing you to manipulate
the audio processing :term:`graph` dynamically.

While :term:`scsynth`'s nodes "live" inside the server, Supriya provides
:term:`proxy <proxy>` classes for manipulating and inspecting them in Python.

Let's dig in...

Lifecycle
---------

Nodes can only be added to running servers, so let's create one and boot it::

    >>> server = supriya.Server().boot()

Creating groups
```````````````

Create a group, and print its :term:`repr` to the terminal::

    >>> group_one = server.add_group()
    >>> group_one

The :term:`repr` shows the group's type (``Group``), its :term:`ID <ID, node>`
(``1000``), and indicates it has been allocated (``+``).

Positioning
```````````

Let's add another group. Groups can be added relative to other groups::

    >>> group_two = group_one.add_group()

Where was the second group added? Query the server to see::

    >>> print(server.query())

The second group (``1001``) was added *within* the first (``1000``), which
seems obvious in retrospect. Let's add a third group to the first, and query
the server's node tree again::

    >>> group_three = group_one.add_group()
    >>> print(server.query())

The third group (``1002``) was - *again* - added within the first (``1000``), but
appears *before* the second (``1001``).

By default, adding nodes to a group adds them to the :term:`head` of the group,
rather than the :term:`tail` (which is identical behavior to :term:`sclang`).
When adding nodes to the :term:`node tree`, every node must be added relative
to another node - before, after, at the beginning (the head) or at the end (the
tail) - and we can control that relative position with an :term:`add action`.

Supriya implements :term:`add actions <add action>` as the enumeration
:py:class:`~supriya.enums.AddAction`::

    >>> for x in supriya.AddAction: x
    ...

Use :py:class:`~supriya.enums.AddAction` to position new groups relative to the
first::

    >>> group_four = group_one.add_group(add_action=supriya.AddAction.ADD_AFTER)
    >>> print(server.query())
    >>> group_five = group_one.add_group(add_action=supriya.AddAction.ADD_BEFORE)
    >>> print(server.query())
    >>> group_six = group_one.add_group(add_action=supriya.AddAction.ADD_TO_HEAD)
    >>> print(server.query())
    >>> group_seven = group_one.add_group(add_action=supriya.AddAction.ADD_TO_TAIL)
    >>> print(server.query())
    >>> group_eight = group_one.add_group(add_action=supriya.AddAction.REPLACE)
    >>> print(server.query())

.. note::

    Supriya will attempt to coerce a variety of inputs into a valid
    :py:class:`~supriya.enums.AddAction`::

        >>> for x in [None, 0, "ADD_TO_HEAD", "add_to_head", "add to head"]:
        ...     supriya.AddAction.from_expr(x)
        ...

    This allows you to specify the :term:`add action` via a string, saving a
    few keystrokes::

        >>> server.add_group(add_action="add to head")

.. note::

    When using :term:`supernova` as your server executable, you can create
    _parallel_ groups by specifying ``parallel=True`` in any call you would use
    to create a group::

        >>> server.add_group(parallel=True)

    Parallel groups will process their child nodes via multiple threads.
    Because the order of node processing within a parallel group is
    non-deterministic they're best suited for summing together signals rather
    than processing in-place.

Creating synths
```````````````

Now, reset the server, then create a synth, and print its :term:`repr` to the
terminal::

    >>> server.reset()
    >>> synth = server.add_synth()
    >>> synth

The :term:`repr` shows the synths's type (``Synth``), its :term:`ID <ID, node>`
(``1000``), its :term:`SynthDef` name (``default``), and indicates it has been
allocated (``+``). We discuss synth definitions in depth :doc:`later
<../synthdefs/index>`, but suffice it to say a :term:`SynthDef` represents a
graph of operators that do audio processing. If that sounds fractally like what
we're already discussing, you're not wrong. It's graphs all the way down.

So far we've only used the "default" SynthDef, which generates a simple stereo
sawtooth wave. Let's create two more.

This SynthDef generates a continuous train of clicks::

    >>> with supriya.SynthDefBuilder(amplitude=0.5, frequency=1.0, out=0) as builder:
    ...     impulse = supriya.ugens.Impulse.ar( 
    ...         frequency=builder["frequency"],
    ...     )
    ...     source = impulse * builder["amplitude"]
    ...     out = supriya.ugens.Out.ar(
    ...         bus=builder["out"],
    ...         source=[source, source],
    ...     )
    ...
    >>> ticker_synthdef = builder.build(name="ticker")

This SynthDef reads audio from a bus, reverberates it, then writes back the
wet audio mixed with the dry::

    >>> with supriya.SynthDefBuilder(damping=0.5, mix=0.5, out=0, room_size=0.5) as builder:
    ...     in_ = supriya.ugens.In.ar(
    ...         bus=builder["out"],
    ...         channel_count=2,
    ...     )
    ...     reverb = supriya.ugens.FreeVerb.ar(
    ...         damping=builder["damping"],
    ...         mix=builder["mix"],
    ...         room_size=builder["room_size"],
    ...         source=in_,
    ...     ) 
    ...     out = supriya.ugens.ReplaceOut.ar(
    ...         bus=builder["out"],
    ...         source=reverb,
    ...     )
    ...
    >>> reverb_synthdef = builder.build(name="reverb")
  
Create a synth using the "ticker" SynthDef, replacing the "default" synth we
just created::

    >>> synth.add_synth(synthdef=ticker_synthdef, frequency=4, add_action="replace")

Then create a second synth using the "reverb" SynthDef, positioning it after
the previous synth with an ``ADD_TO_TAIL`` :term:`add action`::

    >>> server.add_synth(synthdef=reverb_synthdef, add_action="add_to_tail")

Note the order of the two synths (you can tell by their SynthDef names), and
how the reverberation kicks in when you instantiate the second synth::

    >>> print(server.query())

.. note::

    Supriya keeps track of which SynthDefs have already been allocated, and
    will automatically allocate them for you when you add synths to the server.
    If you need precise timing, make sure to pre-allocate the SynthDefs.

    See :doc:`../synthdefs/index` and :doc:`../osc` for more details.

Deleting
````````

Reset the server for a clean slate, then add a synth::

    >>> server.reset()
    >>> synth = server.add_synth()

You can remove a node from the server by :term:`freeing <free>` it::

    >>> synth.free()

Note how the audio cuts off abruptly. Freeing nodes terminates them immediately
without any fade-out.

Now add another synth and :term:`release` it::

    >>> synth = server.add_synth()
    >>> synth.release()

Some synths can be :term:`released <release>`, depending on their
:term:`SynthDef`, and will fade out before freeing themselves automatically
from the server. By convention with :term:`sclang`, synths with a ``gate``
control can be released, although it's up to the author of the :term:`SynthDef`
to guarantee they behave as expected.

.. book::
    :hide:

    >>> synth.free()

Groups can also be freed::

    >>> group = server.add_group()
    >>> group.free()

A freed group retains its internal structure::

    >>> grandparent = server.add_group()
    >>> parent = grandparent.add_group()
    >>> child = parent.add_synth()
    >>> print(server.query())
    >>> grandparent.free()
    >>> print(grandparent)

... and can be re-allocated::

    >>> server.default_group.move_node(grandparent)
    >>> print(server.query())

Inspection
----------

Reset the server for a clean slate::

    >>> server.reset()

... then create a group and add three synths to it::

    >>> group = server.add_group()
    >>> synth_a = group.add_synth(frequency=333)
    >>> synth_b = group.add_synth(frequency=444)
    >>> synth_c = group.add_synth(frequency=555)

Every node has a ``node_id`` and, if allocated, a reference to its server::

    >>> group.node_id, group.server
    >>> synth_a.node_id, synth_a.server
    >>> synth_b.node_id, synth_b.server
    >>> synth_c.node_id, synth_c.server

Position
````````

Nodes know about their position in the :term:`node tree`.

The synths we created know that the group we (also) created is their :term:`parent`::

    >>> synth_a.parent

They know that the :term:`root node` of the server is their :term:`root`::

    >>> synth_a.root

And they know the entire :term:`parentage` between themself and their :term:`root`::

    >>> synth_a.parentage

Likewise, the group we created knows about its children::

    >>> group.children

And every node knows its :term:`depth` in the :term:`node tree`::

    >>> for node in synth_a.parentage:
    ...     node, node.depth
    ...

Querying controls
`````````````````

If a synth's :term:`SynthDef` exposes controls, we can query them.

We can query each synth's ``frequency`` control by looking it up as though the
synth was a Python dictionary::

    >>> synth_a["frequency"]
    >>> synth_b["frequency"]
    >>> synth_c["frequency"]

We can also iterate over the synth's controls, just like iterating over the
keys in a dictionary::

    >>> for key in synth_a:
    ...     key, synth_a[key]
    ...

We can access the underlying control interface of the synth::

    >>> synth_a.controls

... and iterate over the individual control objects, again just like a dictionary::

    >>> for key in synth_a:
    ...     key, synth_a.controls[key]
    ...

The synth controls know not only their control name and current value, but the
synth they're associated with and their :term:`calculation rate`.

Groups also expose a control interface::

    >>> group.controls

... which can be iterated over::

    >>> for key in group.controls:
    ...     key, group.controls[key]
    ...

Group's don't have :term:`SynthDefs <SynthDef>`, so they don't actually have
controls. Their control interface just indicates that they have *some* children
in their :term:`subtree` with those controls.

Interaction
-----------

Reset the server for a clean slate::

    >>> server.reset()

... then add a group, a *ticker* synth and a *reverb* synth using the two
:term:`SynthDefs <SynthDef>` we defined earlier::

    >>> group = server.add_group()
    >>> ticker_synth = group.add_synth(synthdef=ticker_synthdef)
    >>> reverb_synth = group.add_synth(add_action="add_to_tail", synthdef=reverb_synthdef)

Note the click train emitted by the *ticker* synth and the reverberation added
by the *reverb* synth. 

Now we'll interact with these three nodes to modify their sound ...

Moving
``````

Nodes can be moved relative to other nodes, using the same :term:`add actions
<add action>` used when allocating nodes.

Move the *reverb* synth to the :term:`head` of its parent group - *before* the
*ticker* synth - and notice how the click train's reverberation dies out::

    >>> group.move_node(reverb_synth, "add_to_head")
    >>> print(group)

Now move the *reverb* synth *after* the *ticker* synth, and listen to the
reverberation return::

    >>> ticker_synth.move_node(reverb_synth, "add_after")
    >>> print(group)

.. note::

    Use :py:func:`~supriya.realtime.nodes.Node.move_node` to *re-allocate*
    nodes that have been previously freed (or never allocated at all)::

        >>> ticker_synth.free()
        >>> print(group)
        >>> group.move_node(ticker_synth, "add_to_head")
        >>> print(group)

    Notice that the "ticker" synth now has a new node ID.

Setting controls
````````````````

Setting controls on nodes looks like setting keys on a Python dictionary.

Change the *ticker* synth's frequency control to ``1`` :term:`Hertz`, clicking
once every second::

    >>> ticker_synth["frequency"] = 1

Change the *reverb* synth's "room-size" control to ``0.1`` to reduce the size
of the simulated reverb space::

    >>> reverb_synth["room_size"] = 0.1

Like a Python dictionary, setting non-existent controls on a synth will raise a
``KeyError``:

.. book::
    :allow-exceptions:

    >>> ticker_synth["nonexistent"] = 666.666

Multiple controls can be set on a synth simultaneously by using a tuple of keys
and a tuple of values. Let's create a long bright reverb by changing both the
reverb's *room size* and its *damping*::

    >>> reverb_synth["damping", "room_size"] = 0.1, 0.95

Because groups are aware of their child synths' controls, we can set the
control of any of their children by setting it on the group.

Let's set the frequency of the *ticker* synth's click train by setting
``frequency`` on the parent group::

    >>> group.controls["frequency"] = 10.0

The group does not *have* a ``frequency`` control - it just propagates the
control setting to any synth in its :term:`subtree`.

Pausing
```````

Nodes can be paused and unpaused. Paused synths perform no audio processing,
and all children of paused groups are considered paused.

Let's pause the *ticker* synth, and notice how the click train stops::

    >>> ticker_synth.pause()

You can still hear the reverberation from the *reverb* synth since it wasn't
paused.

Unpause the *ticker* synth to resume the click train::

    >>> ticker_synth.unpause()

Now let's pause the *ticker* and *reverb* synths' parent group::

    >>> group.pause()

Notice how audio is completely silenced, both the *ticker*'s click train and
the *reverb*'s reverberation.

Unpause the parent group to resume audio processing::

    >>> group.unpause()

Lower level APIs
----------------

Bare allocation
```````````````

Groups and synths can be created by hand and allocated::

    >>> group = supriya.Group()
    >>> synth = supriya.Synth()

When using a server as the target, allocate the node relative to the current
user's "default group" on that server (ID ``1`` in a single-user scenario)::

    >>> group.allocate(server)

Allocate a node relative to another node::

    >>> synth.allocate(group, add_action=supriya.AddAction.ADD_TO_TAIL)

You can use ``.allocate()`` to *re-allocate* nodes previously freed.

Sequence interface
``````````````````
Reset the server for a clean slate::

    >>> server.reset()

Supriya's groups support Python's list interface, allowing appending,
extending, subscripting etc., and allow you to create complex node trees before
(or even after) allocation::

    >>> grandparent = supriya.Group()
    >>> parent = supriya.Group()
    >>> grandparent.append(parent)
    >>> parent.extend([
    ...     supriya.Synth(frequency=111),
    ...     supriya.Synth(frequency=222),
    ...     supriya.Synth(frequency=333),
    ... ])
    >>> server.default_group.append(grandparent)
    >>> print(server.query())

We can use the list interface to move nodes, and even re-order them::

    >>> server.default_group.extend([parent[2], parent[0]])
    >>> print(server.query())

... or replace nodes entirely::

    >>> server.default_group[:] = [parent]
    >>> print(server.query())

.. caution::

    Replacing group contents via subscripting will immediately free the
    replaced nodes, possibly resulting in audible clicks.
